Article003/article003.md, before:

![Three bikes, each captioned with version, in order starting from an oldest prototyped from eighteenth century, followed by bicycle from 1870, ending on newest one, used in modern days.](Resources/swift_package_versioning.png)

# Versioning automation for Swift Packages

*(This article assumes you have basic knowledge of shell scripts)*

## The challenge of version management

Shared library version management can be a daunting task. Whether you're working on an in-house project or maintaining a public package, keeping track of changes and their impact becomes increasingly complex as the project grows. Even for solo developers, there's a significant risk of introducing breaking changes without properly marking them with a major version bump.

## The solution: automated versioning

This article presents a practical solution through automation. We'll explore how to either fully automate the versioning process or verify manually proposed versions, ensuring consistent and correct semantic versioning across your Swift packages.

## Understanding Swift Package Manager versioning

Swift Package Manager (SPM) uses [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org) (semver). While Semantic Versioning supports suffixes (like `1.0.1-alpha`), SPM works best with the "version core" only (e.g., `1.0.1`). Tagging changes with just the version core enables library consumers to reliably use SPM's `.upToNextMinor(from:)` and `.upToNextMajor(from:)` to specify supported versions.

## How it can be achieved?

Let's break down our automation approach into clear, manageable steps:

1. **Compare API states**: We'll extract the public interface from both the latest tagged version and the current codebase
2. **Analyze differences**: We'll identify what has been added, modified, or removed in the public API
3. **Apply versioning rules**: Based on the changes detected, we'll determine the appropriate version bump:
   - **Patch** (x.x.Z) - bug fixes and internal changes that don't affect the public API
   - **Minor** (x.Y.x) - new features that are backward compatible
   - **Major** (X.x.x) - breaking changes that require consumer code updates
4. **Propose version**: We'll generate the next appropriate version number following semantic versioning principles

### Script foundation and argument parsing

First, setup the script basics:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

set -Eeuo pipefail
trap 'error_handler ${FUNCNAME-main context} ${LINENO} $?' ERR

# CONSTANTS

readonly CALL_DIR="$PWD"
readonly SCRIPT_NAME=$(basename -s ".sh" "$0")
readonly TEMP_DIRECTORY="tmp$RANDOM"

# FUNCTIONS

function error_handler() {
    echo "$SCRIPT_NAME.sh: in '$1()', line $2: error: $3"
    reset
    exit 1
}

function main() {
}

# ENTRY POINT

while [[ $# -gt 0 ]]; do
    case $1 in
        # Device for which public interface is created. Use value supported by `-destination` argument from `xcodebuild archive`,
        # e.g. `platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 14,OS=17.0`.
        -d|--device)
            DESTINATION=${2}
            shift 2
        ;;
        # Derived data path (optional).
        -r|--derived-data-path)
            DERIVED_DATA_PATH=${2}
            ARCHIVE_PATH="$DERIVED_DATA_PATH/archive"
            shift 2
        ;;
        # Package scheme name. For packages with multiple targets, it may be required to add `-Package` suffix.
        # Example: your package is named `ClientService` and has two targets inside: `ClientServiceDTOs` and `ClientServiceAPI`.
        # Then, your target would be `ClientService-Package`.
        -s|--scheme)
            SCHEME=${2}
            shift 2
        ;;
        *)
            echo "Unknown parameter: '${1}'."
            exit 1
        ;;
    esac
done

main
```

The argument parsing allows parametrized inputs, like:

```bash
propose_next_version.sh \
    --device "platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 16,OS=18.0" \
    --derived-data-path ".build" \
    --scheme "FooBar"
```

Although `$DERIVED_DATA_PATH` is optional, I highly recommend using it. Due to different directory (I suggest local, e.g. `./.build`) it prevents data collision issues when the script runs in parallel CI jobs on one runner.

Next, add some helpers which will be used later on:

```bash
function reset() {
    cd "$CALL_DIR"
    rm -rf "$TEMP_DIRECTORY" > /dev/null
}

# Extract package name from Package.swift
function swift_package_name() {
    swift package describe --type json | jq -r .name
}
```

These helper functions serve two purposes: `reset()` cleans up temporary files and returns to the original directory, while `swift_package_name()` extracts the package name from `Package.swift` using Swift's built-in package description and jq for JSON parsing.
Make sure you have [`jq`](https://github.com/jqlang/jq) installed.

### Finding the current version tag

We need to identify the latest version to compare against. The script scans git history starting from the active branch HEAD to find the latest version tag:

```bash
function get_current_version_tag_name() {
    local current_branch_name
    local last_reference_tag_name

    current_branch_name=$(git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD)
    last_reference_tag_name=$(git tag --merged="$current_branch_name" --list --sort=-version:refname "[0-9]*.[0-9]*.[0-9]*" | head -n 1)
    cat <<< "$last_reference_tag_name"
}
```

This function:
1. Gets the current branch name. Usually it is default branch (`main`/`master`)
2. Lists all tags merged into the current branch that match semver pattern
3. Sorts them by version in reverse order (`-version:refname`), from latest to oldest
4. Takes the first (latest) one

### Generating public API interfaces

Swift provides built-in capabilities to generate public API files. We could have two different approaches depending on the package type:

For packages using Apple frameworks (like `UIKit`):

```bash
function build_public_interface() {
    xcodebuild \
        -archivePath "$ARCHIVE_PATH" \
        -derivedDataPath "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH" \
        -destination "$DESTINATION" \
        -scheme "$SCHEME" \
        BUILD_LIBRARY_FOR_DISTRIBUTION=YES \
        SKIP_INSTALL=NO \
        OTHER_SWIFT_FLAGS="-no-verify-emitted-module-interface" \
        archive | xcbeautify
}
```
Be aware that the above solution works only on macOS.

For clean Swift packages (universal):

```bash
function build_public_interface() {
    swift build \
        --build-path "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH" \
        -Xswiftc -enable-library-evolution \
        -Xswiftc -emit-module-interface \
        -Xswiftc -no-verify-emitted-module-interface | xcbeautify
}
```

By default, after generating public interface, compiler verifies it. The `-no-verify-emitted-module-interface"` parameter disables that verification. 
In our case we only need generated file and its verification is not required.
`xcbeautify` is not a mandatory here, but it is nice to have. It prints nicely the building output which we may use in case of encountered build error.

### Extracting the public interface

After building the package, we need to extract its public interface for comparison. The function below automates this process:

```bash
function get_public_interface() {
    local package_name
    local public_interface_directory
    local build_output

    if ! build_output=$(build_public_interface 2>&1); then
        echo "❌ Build failed. Error details:"
        echo "$build_output"
        echo "Cannot complete the build due to the compile error. Check logs above."
        return 1
    fi

    package_name=$(swift_package_name)
    public_interface_directory=$(find "./$DERIVED_DATA_PATH/" -name "${package_name}.swiftinterface")
    cat <<<"$(cat "$public_interface_directory")"
}
```

This function:
- Builds the package and captures any compilation errors, exiting early if the build fails.
- Determines the package name and locates the generated `.swiftinterface` file.
- Outputs the contents of the public interface, which will be used for API comparison.

### Creating temporary workspaces and comparing versions

Let's build now the `main` function. First, define local variabales, get branch name and latest version tag. Setup reporary directories and cleanup derived-data folder to avoid any possible data issues:

```bash
local current_branch_name
local current_public_interface
local current_public_interface_path
local has_breaking_changes
local has_additive_changes
local normalized_derived_data_path
local normalized_temp_dir
local temp_diff_directory
local temp_version_directory
local version_public_interface
local version_public_interface_path
local version_tag

local -r semantic_version_regex='([0-9]+).([0-9]+).([0-9]+)'

current_branch_name=$(git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD)
version_tag=$(get_current_version_tag_name)

normalized_temp_dir=$(echo "$TEMP_DIRECTORY" | sed 's/^\.\///')
normalized_derived_data_path=$(echo "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH" | sed 's/^\.\///')

temp_diff_directory="$TEMP_DIRECTORY/diff"
temp_version_directory="$TEMP_DIRECTORY/version"

# Clean up derived data directory to prevent usage of any cached files
rm -rf "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH"
```

Next, create temporary copies of both the tagged version and current changes. They are going to be used for diffing later:

```bash
# Copy change tagged with given version tag to temporary directory
git clone "$CALL_DIR" --branch "$version_tag" --single-branch "$temp_version_directory" --quiet --recurse-submodules -c advice.detachedHead=false

# Get public interface from the previous version
cd "$temp_version_directory"
version_public_interface=$(get_public_interface)

# Go back to the project root.
cd "$CALL_DIR"

# Get public interface from the current changes
current_public_interface=$(get_public_interface)

# Save public interfaces for comparison
mkdir -p "$temp_diff_directory"
version_public_interface_path="$temp_diff_directory/version.swiftinterface"
current_public_interface_path="$temp_diff_directory/current.swiftinterface"

# Save public API outputs without comments (comments can change without affecting API)
echo "$version_public_interface" | grep --invert-match '^//' > "$version_public_interface_path"
echo "$current_public_interface" | grep --invert-match '^//' > "$current_public_interface_path"
```

### Analyzing differences and proposing versions

The final step compares the two interface files using `diff`:

```bash
# Make public interfaces diffs
has_breaking_changes=$(diff "$version_public_interface_path" "$current_public_interface_path" | grep -c -i "^<" || true)
has_additive_changes=$(diff "$version_public_interface_path" "$current_public_interface_path" | grep -c -i "^>" || true)

# Create version based on diff output
if [[ ! $version_tag =~ $semantic_version_regex ]]; then
    cat <<< "$version_tag"
else
    local major="${BASH_REMATCH[1]}"
    local minor="${BASH_REMATCH[2]}"
    local patch="${BASH_REMATCH[3]}"

    if [[ $has_breaking_changes -gt 0 ]]; then
        major=$((major+1))
        minor=0
        patch=0
    elif [[ $has_additive_changes -gt 0 ]]; then
        minor=$((minor+1))
        patch=0
    else
        patch=$((patch+1))
    fi

    cat <<< "${major}.${minor}.${patch}"
fi
```

The semantic version is parsed using regex. Based on the diff analysis:
- **Breaking changes** (lines removed from the API, indicated by `^<` in diff output): increment major version, reset minor and patch to 0
- **Additive changes** (new lines added to the API, indicated by `^>` in diff output): increment minor version, reset patch to 0  
- **No API changes**: increment only the patch version

### Cleanup

Finally, clean up the temporary directory to avoid leaving behind artifacts:

```bash
reset
```

## Practical usage examples

The script above can be used to create a tag with every successful merge into the default branch (`main`/`master`). Here's a complete usage example:

```bash
# Basic usage
chmod +x "propose_next_version.sh" && ./propose_next_version.sh \
    --device "platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 16,OS=18.0" \
    --derived-data-path ".build" \
    --scheme "MyPackage"

# In CI/CD pipeline
NEXT_VERSION=$(chmod +x "propose_next_version.sh" && ./propose_next_version.sh --device "platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 16,OS=18.0" --derived-data-path ".build" --scheme "MyPackage")
git tag "$NEXT_VERSION"
git push origin "$NEXT_VERSION"
```

## Conclusion

By combining Swift's built-in tools with shell scripting, we've created a solution for automating version proposals. This approach ensures consistent versioning practices and reduces human error in version management.

The complete code for this article is available in [my GitHub repository](https://github.com/Filozoff/BlogArticles/tree/master/Article003).

## Future improvements

While described current solution provides a solid foundation, there are several areas where it could be enhanced:

1. **Dependency analysis**: Implement scanning of `Package.swift` for dependency version changes that might affect compatibility
2. **Package mutliple target support**: This solution works well for one-target Swift packages. It can be improved to scan all targets within provided `scheme` and do diffing for all public interface files
3. **Custom API Analysis**: Develop more sophisticated parsing for complex API changes

For GitHub users, instead of implementing this from scratch, consider using a ready-made action from my repository: [Filozoff/action-swift-propose-next-version](https://github.com/Filozoff/action-swift-propose-next-version). You can see [a live example of its usage](https://github.com/Filozoff/XCTestExtension/blob/master/.github/workflows/ci.yml) in my library.

Commit message:

Apply changes from 2nd review - mention about beta releases and multiple device support in further improvements

Article003/article003.md, after:

![Three bikes, each captioned with version, in order starting from an oldest prototyped from eighteenth century, followed by bicycle from 1870, ending on newest one, used in modern days.](Resources/swift_package_versioning.png)

# Versioning automation for Swift Packages

*(This article assumes you have basic knowledge of shell scripts)*

## The challenge of version management

Shared library version management can be a daunting task. Whether you're working on an in-house project or maintaining a public package, keeping track of changes and their impact becomes increasingly complex as the project grows. Even for solo developers, there's a significant risk of introducing breaking changes without properly marking them with a major version bump.

## The solution: automated versioning

This article presents a practical solution through automation. We'll explore how to either fully automate the versioning process or verify manually proposed versions, ensuring consistent and correct semantic versioning across your Swift packages.

## Understanding Swift Package Manager versioning

Swift Package Manager (SPM) uses [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org) (semver). While Semantic Versioning supports suffixes (like `1.0.1-alpha`), SPM works best with the "version core" only (e.g., `1.0.1`). Tagging changes with just the version core enables library consumers to reliably use SPM's `.upToNextMinor(from:)` and `.upToNextMajor(from:)` to specify supported versions.

## How it can be achieved?

Let's break down our automation approach into clear, manageable steps:

1. **Compare API states**: We'll extract the public interface from both the latest tagged version and the current codebase
2. **Analyze differences**: We'll identify what has been added, modified, or removed in the public API
3. **Apply versioning rules**: Based on the changes detected, we'll determine the appropriate version bump:
   - **Patch** (x.x.Z) - bug fixes and internal changes that don't affect the public API
   - **Minor** (x.Y.x) - new features that are backward compatible
   - **Major** (X.x.x) - breaking changes that require consumer code updates
4. **Propose version**: We'll generate the next appropriate version number following semantic versioning principles

### Script foundation and argument parsing

First, setup the script basics:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

set -Eeuo pipefail
trap 'error_handler ${FUNCNAME-main context} ${LINENO} $?' ERR

# CONSTANTS

readonly CALL_DIR="$PWD"
readonly SCRIPT_NAME=$(basename -s ".sh" "$0")
readonly TEMP_DIRECTORY="tmp$RANDOM"

# FUNCTIONS

function error_handler() {
    echo "$SCRIPT_NAME.sh: in '$1()', line $2: error: $3"
    reset
    exit 1
}

function main() {
}

# ENTRY POINT

while [[ $# -gt 0 ]]; do
    case $1 in
        # Device for which public interface is created. Use value supported by `-destination` argument from `xcodebuild archive`,
        # e.g. `platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 14,OS=17.0`.
        -d|--device)
            DESTINATION=${2}
            shift 2
        ;;
        # Derived data path (optional).
        -r|--derived-data-path)
            DERIVED_DATA_PATH=${2}
            ARCHIVE_PATH="$DERIVED_DATA_PATH/archive"
            shift 2
        ;;
        # Package scheme name. For packages with multiple targets, it may be required to add `-Package` suffix.
        # Example: your package is named `ClientService` and has two targets inside: `ClientServiceDTOs` and `ClientServiceAPI`.
        # Then, your target would be `ClientService-Package`.
        -s|--scheme)
            SCHEME=${2}
            shift 2
        ;;
        *)
            echo "Unknown parameter: '${1}'."
            exit 1
        ;;
    esac
done

main
```

The argument parsing allows parametrized inputs, like:

```bash
propose_next_version.sh \
    --device "platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 16,OS=18.0" \
    --derived-data-path ".build" \
    --scheme "FooBar"
```

Although `$DERIVED_DATA_PATH` is optional, I highly recommend using it. Due to different directory (I suggest local, e.g. `./.build`) it prevents data collision issues when the script runs in parallel CI jobs on one runner.

Next, add some helpers which will be used later on:

```bash
function reset() {
    cd "$CALL_DIR"
    rm -rf "$TEMP_DIRECTORY" > /dev/null
}

# Extract package name from Package.swift
function swift_package_name() {
    swift package describe --type json | jq -r .name
}
```

These helper functions serve two purposes: `reset()` cleans up temporary files and returns to the original directory, while `swift_package_name()` extracts the package name from `Package.swift` using Swift's built-in package description and jq for JSON parsing.
Make sure you have [`jq`](https://github.com/jqlang/jq) installed.

### Finding the current version tag

We need to identify the latest version to compare against. The script scans git history starting from the active branch HEAD to find the latest version tag:

```bash
function get_current_version_tag_name() {
    local current_branch_name
    local last_reference_tag_name

    current_branch_name=$(git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD)
    last_reference_tag_name=$(git tag --merged="$current_branch_name" --list --sort=-version:refname "[0-9]*.[0-9]*.[0-9]*" | head -n 1)
    cat <<< "$last_reference_tag_name"
}
```

This function:
1. Gets the current branch name. Usually it is default branch (`main`/`master`)
2. Lists all tags merged into the current branch that match semver pattern
3. Sorts them by version in reverse order (`-version:refname`), from latest to oldest
4. Takes the first (latest) one

### Generating public API interfaces

Swift provides built-in capabilities to generate public API files. We could have two different approaches depending on the package type:

For packages using Apple frameworks (like `UIKit`):

```bash
function build_public_interface() {
    xcodebuild \
        -archivePath "$ARCHIVE_PATH" \
        -derivedDataPath "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH" \
        -destination "$DESTINATION" \
        -scheme "$SCHEME" \
        BUILD_LIBRARY_FOR_DISTRIBUTION=YES \
        SKIP_INSTALL=NO \
        OTHER_SWIFT_FLAGS="-no-verify-emitted-module-interface" \
        archive | xcbeautify
}
```
Be aware that the above solution works only on macOS.

For clean Swift packages (universal):

```bash
function build_public_interface() {
    swift build \
        --build-path "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH" \
        -Xswiftc -enable-library-evolution \
        -Xswiftc -emit-module-interface \
        -Xswiftc -no-verify-emitted-module-interface | xcbeautify
}
```

By default, after generating public interface, compiler verifies it. The `-no-verify-emitted-module-interface"` parameter disables that verification. 
In our case we only need generated file and its verification is not required.
`xcbeautify` is not a mandatory here, but it is nice to have. It prints nicely the building output which we may use in case of encountered build error.

### Extracting the public interface

After building the package, we need to extract its public interface for comparison. The function below automates this process:

```bash
function get_public_interface() {
    local package_name
    local public_interface_directory
    local build_output

    if ! build_output=$(build_public_interface 2>&1); then
        echo "❌ Build failed. Error details:"
        echo "$build_output"
        echo "Cannot complete the build due to the compile error. Check logs above."
        return 1
    fi

    package_name=$(swift_package_name)
    public_interface_directory=$(find "./$DERIVED_DATA_PATH/" -name "${package_name}.swiftinterface")
    cat <<<"$(cat "$public_interface_directory")"
}
```

This function:
- Builds the package and captures any compilation errors, exiting early if the build fails.
- Determines the package name and locates the generated `.swiftinterface` file.
- Outputs the contents of the public interface, which will be used for API comparison.

### Creating temporary workspaces and comparing versions

Let's build now the `main` function. First, define local variabales, get branch name and latest version tag. Setup reporary directories and cleanup derived-data folder to avoid any possible data issues:

```bash
local current_branch_name
local current_public_interface
local current_public_interface_path
local has_breaking_changes
local has_additive_changes
local normalized_derived_data_path
local normalized_temp_dir
local temp_diff_directory
local temp_version_directory
local version_public_interface
local version_public_interface_path
local version_tag

local -r semantic_version_regex='([0-9]+).([0-9]+).([0-9]+)'

current_branch_name=$(git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD)
version_tag=$(get_current_version_tag_name)

normalized_temp_dir=$(echo "$TEMP_DIRECTORY" | sed 's/^\.\///')
normalized_derived_data_path=$(echo "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH" | sed 's/^\.\///')

temp_diff_directory="$TEMP_DIRECTORY/diff"
temp_version_directory="$TEMP_DIRECTORY/version"

# Clean up derived data directory to prevent usage of any cached files
rm -rf "$DERIVED_DATA_PATH"
```

Next, create temporary copies of both the tagged version and current changes. They are going to be used for diffing later:

```bash
# Copy change tagged with given version tag to temporary directory
git clone "$CALL_DIR" --branch "$version_tag" --single-branch "$temp_version_directory" --quiet --recurse-submodules -c advice.detachedHead=false

# Get public interface from the previous version
cd "$temp_version_directory"
version_public_interface=$(get_public_interface)

# Go back to the project root.
cd "$CALL_DIR"

# Get public interface from the current changes
current_public_interface=$(get_public_interface)

# Save public interfaces for comparison
mkdir -p "$temp_diff_directory"
version_public_interface_path="$temp_diff_directory/version.swiftinterface"
current_public_interface_path="$temp_diff_directory/current.swiftinterface"

# Save public API outputs without comments (comments can change without affecting API)
echo "$version_public_interface" | grep --invert-match '^//' > "$version_public_interface_path"
echo "$current_public_interface" | grep --invert-match '^//' > "$current_public_interface_path"
```

### Analyzing differences and proposing versions

The final step compares the two interface files using `diff`:

```bash
# Make public interfaces diffs
has_breaking_changes=$(diff "$version_public_interface_path" "$current_public_interface_path" | grep -c -i "^<" || true)
has_additive_changes=$(diff "$version_public_interface_path" "$current_public_interface_path" | grep -c -i "^>" || true)

# Create version based on diff output
if [[ ! $version_tag =~ $semantic_version_regex ]]; then
    cat <<< "$version_tag"
else
    local major="${BASH_REMATCH[1]}"
    local minor="${BASH_REMATCH[2]}"
    local patch="${BASH_REMATCH[3]}"

    if [[ $has_breaking_changes -gt 0 ]]; then
        major=$((major+1))
        minor=0
        patch=0
    elif [[ $has_additive_changes -gt 0 ]]; then
        minor=$((minor+1))
        patch=0
    else
        patch=$((patch+1))
    fi

    cat <<< "${major}.${minor}.${patch}"
fi
```

The semantic version is parsed using regex. Based on the diff analysis:
- **Breaking changes** (lines removed from the API, indicated by `^<` in diff output): increment major version, reset minor and patch to 0
- **Additive changes** (new lines added to the API, indicated by `^>` in diff output): increment minor version, reset patch to 0  
- **No API changes**: increment only the patch version

### Cleanup

Finally, clean up the temporary directory to avoid leaving behind artifacts:

```bash
reset
```

## Practical usage examples

The script above can be used to create a tag with every successful merge into the default branch (`main`/`master`). Here's a complete usage example:

```bash
# Basic usage
chmod +x "propose_next_version.sh" && ./propose_next_version.sh \
    --device "platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 16,OS=18.0" \
    --derived-data-path ".build" \
    --scheme "MyPackage"

# In CI/CD pipeline
NEXT_VERSION=$(chmod +x "propose_next_version.sh" && ./propose_next_version.sh --device "platform=iOS Simulator,name=iPhone 16,OS=18.0" --derived-data-path ".build" --scheme "MyPackage")
git tag "$NEXT_VERSION"
git push origin "$NEXT_VERSION"
```

## Conclusion

By combining Swift's built-in tools with shell scripting, we've created a solution for automating version proposals. This approach ensures consistent versioning practices and reduces human error in version management.

The complete code for this article is available in [my GitHub repository](https://github.com/Filozoff/BlogArticles/tree/master/Article003).

## Future improvements

While described current solution provides a solid foundation, there are several areas where it could be enhanced:

1. **Dependency analysis**: Implement scanning of `Package.swift` for dependency version changes that might affect compatibility
2. **Package mutliple target support**: This solution works well for one-target Swift packages. It can be improved to scan all targets within provided `scheme` and do diffing for all public interface files
3. **Custom API Analysis**: Develop more sophisticated parsing for complex API changes, like treating new parameter with default value inside a method or enum as non-breaking change
4. **Beta releases support**: The discussed script handles versioning for mature packages, where breaking changes bump the `MAJOR` version. For beta releases, breaking changes would bump the `MINOR` version instead
5. **Multiple device support**: Some packages have platform-specific APIs for Linux or macOS. The current example requires developers to run the script individually for each supported platform and compare the resulting versions

For GitHub users, instead of implementing this from scratch, consider using a ready-made action from my repository: [Filozoff/action-swift-propose-next-version](https://github.com/Filozoff/action-swift-propose-next-version). You can see [a live example of its usage](https://github.com/Filozoff/XCTestExtension/blob/master/.github/workflows/ci.yml) in my library.
